rxjs-error-handling,    hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCFbx9nRnTuHp_uD5Iz2M94 
haskell-for-beginners,  hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCtgtg3wqDwvzyKtVsCBQxD
angular-schematics,     hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PB8XH7k1bzD_UGPQ21mea0f 
css-units,        	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PAfoPIcap9TN_NBfvmHcZND 
rxjs-error-handling,    hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCFbx9nRnTuHp_uD5Iz2M94 
redux-observable,       hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCDYCQ7PWQo-i0-6Cn49M1R 
json-server,          	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCuNO3PEy63qM5aopfALuyb 
rxjs-patterns,          hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCpgbwYfmJPUG47rPiqRcND
rxjs-errorhandling,     hans, ytl, 
angular-devtools,      	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PAF8parbLI_c0axMLMplrTp
react-remix,           	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PAOFm-yqzGQRlj3ovDKhbQ1
angular-interview,     	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PCdGKCNT0DI8ONMs3mdv_QU 
angular-animations,     hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PA0f-fNW4y79W1fx_H3xraO 
functional-reactive,    hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PBsiwfePjXd8RvjPlYXNulu 
domain-specific-language,dsl, hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PD9n2PRaJ0D7pRvcJgK0Q81 
rxjs-opertors,     	custom operators, hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PB1go--BVbJkIoCpJAhX-Un 
rxjs-games,             hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PDlLC3invaiVNfGb5sSRN2C 
typescript-elm,         hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PDyYBTyq0zVUradDEdwQUGy 
reactive-functional,   	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PBJypha-yvQYx1PMiFSYQh- 
snagit-learn,           hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLqYj2sOxDkVz6Bo3HyqkCPNlAwE6FizNO 
machine-learning,      	hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PBKbInK7b1nInznBpDFaait 
directed-graphs,        hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PAf09H0hhlWiQEVQItCv-Lj 
dataflow-programming,   hans, ytl, https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLw5h0DiJ-9PArd0ngvGXReAiH_Z6kmyth 

