

what is life that's going to be the
question that I'm going to consider this
evening it's one of the most fundamental
questions in biology I think many would
argue it is the most fundamental
question in bio biology I'm going to
talk mostly about life on planet Earth
but the question also makes us think
about life elsewhere in the universe
should it exist perhaps built in
different ways from that on our own
planet before I begin I want to strength
stress something living things are
extraordinary they are completely
extraordinary they are entities that can
maintain themselves they can grow they
can organize themselves construct
themselves reproduce into two identical
copies or close to identical copies they
pass on their characteristics to their
progeny they are also extremely diverse
and it so happens which is why this
lecture is difficult is that life is
very difficult to define now the
approach I'm going to use is to examine
some of the great ideas of biology five
great ideas of biology which
characterize the attributes of life I'm
going to give you a little history of
where those ideas came from and then I'm
going at the end or towards the end of
my lecture to derive from those five
great ideas some core principles with
the hope of getting closer to defining
what life is I hope you noticed the
careful way I said that sentence
clothes hope of getting closer rather
than actually answering the question now
of course I'm not the first to ask this
question it's been wrestled with by
scientists over the ages and my first
slide here was is the first page of a
very influential contribution published
by scrolling her heel the uncertainty
principle a physicist who dabbled in
biology in his later life and published
a book this book here in 1944 it's a
75th anniversary of this book based on
lectures he gave in Dublin in 1943 he

was particularly concerned with how
living organisms maintained order as a
physicist he was particularly interested
in the second law of thermodynamics and
he wanted to know how life could escape
the decay into chaos that is of course
enshrined in that particular law and how
to do it across generations this is two
quotes I've taken from that 1944 book
which actually is quite a good read I I
still read it occasionally and in fact
it's on my kitchen table because of this
talk at this very moment the first there
an organism's astonishing gift of
controlling a stream of order on itself
and thus escaping the decay into atomic
chaos the second law as I just said he's
also interested in how this order
displays the power of maintaining itself
and producing orderly events and this is
what I'm going to be talking about in
the rest of this lecture I'm going to
start it with the cell the cell as the
basic unit of life as I said I'm going
to give a some background to this some
history
the soul was first observed by Robert
Hooke in and who he published his
observations in 1665 and you'll see here
on the left the black and white picture
of what he saw he took a piece of cork
cut it with a razor put it under a
microscope similar to the one you see in
this picture behind me and saw lots of
little boxes I put on the right there
a modern scanning e/m picture it's
pretty similar really not too much
advancing 350 years what he saw there
were rows of boxes he called themselves
after the Latin cellar for small cubicle
and soon after him a Dutch Draper Lowen

Hooke lived in Delft quite a humble man
made even better microscopes then then

hook and he scraped between his teeth
and put it under one of his microscopes
and what did he see he saw bacteria the

very first observations of single-celled
microbial life the charming pictures
here can you see
I think it's Figure B obviously they
were swimming around and did a
loop-the-loop there as you can see lone
hook was a bit disturbed by this because
he's rather proud of his clean teeth and
I think was disturbed at discovering all
this life in between his his teeth he

sent all his observations to the Royal
Society as a thousand letters they're
describing his observations we don't
have a reliable portrait of him but he
was the neighbor of Vermeer the famous
Delft painter and Vermeer and usually
did two paintings of a scientists at
you're a geographer and an astronomer
and I like to think this might be loan
hook that
looking at here I should say as I am a
scientist there's not one ounce of
evidence in favor in favor of that
now although cells were observed just

before the beginning of the 18th century
science developed over quite a long time
and a couple of centuries in fact and
eventually led to two concepts the first
concept was stated here by Theodor
Schwann a German zoologist he published
in German this is a translation here
from 1839 we have seen that all
organisms are composed essentially of
like parts namely of cells in other
words the cell is the basic structural
unit of life very critical the second
observation the second concept I want
you to be aware of a few years later
another German Rudolf Birkhoff
politician and scientists founder of
pathology by the way he stated it's a
little different every animal appears as
a sum of vital units living units each
of which bears in itself the complete
characteristics of life in other words
the cell is also the basic functional
unit of life all growth and development
of life is in fact based on the cell
here's a fertilized mammalian egg with
the sperm bashing on the door of the of
the egg and if I haven't inspired an
interest in you yet let me remind you
all that you once all looked like this
you were once all a single cell through
growth and repeated reproduction of
cells we produce here I mammalian embryo
and then eventually ourselves now what
do we learn by cell from from from this
discussion about cells about life and
what it is this is a modern multicolored
version of cells well a couple of
conclusions the first point is as I have
just said
as the basic structural and functional
unit of life it is the simplest entity
which exhibits the characteristics of
life it can maintain itself it can grow
it can self-organize it reproduces and
it has heredity what this means is if we
try and simplify the discussion that if
we can understand cells then we're very
close to understanding life because it
is the simplest entity that has the
characteristics of life and that means
cells are going to figure quite a lot in
this talk but what I say about cells
applies to living organisms as well
including ourselves the second point is
that the cell is bounded it's separate
from its environment
you saw that obviously with the
microbial cells the bacteria but it's
also the case for all our cells which
are all surrounded by a membrane and
separate from the rest of the
environment why is that important it's
important because it allows order to be
generated within the cell giving rise to
complexity without contravening the
second law of thermodynamics it's an
isolated system which creates order as a
consequence of further disorder in the
environment so in fact the problems with
second law of thermodynamics that
physicists always worry about simply
isn't an issue because of the cell as a
bounded entity although it's a bounded
intimate entity it has to be in
communication with the environment it's
semi permeable the membrane is is
literally semi permeable and it builds
up within itself components that it
takes from outside in its environment it
produces Monteux it takes them off a

concentration gradient it requires
energy to do that but the important
point is that being isolated from the
environment
complexity can arise so we don't have to
worry about the problem that certainly
was of great interest for Schrodinger
however he said something a little more
he was interested in how that orders
maintained generation after generation
and he came up with the idea that maybe
there was a code script and this is
another quote from that little book
these chromosomes we kind of come to
chromosomes in a moment containing some
kind of code script the entire pattern
of the individuals future development in
function is related to a code script and
he goes on to speculate that it may be
what he called an a periodic solid it
was trying to explain how order could
persist and he speculated that that code
script underpinned the development and
function of the living organism now this
is essentially the second great idea of
biology I want to talk about which is
the gene as the basis of heredity now
this came about from work from the abbot
of a monastery in Bruno now the Czech
Republic he was a monk when he did what
I'm about to describe but then became
the abbot he was trained as a physicist

and he got very interested in doing
crosses with plants to try and
understand heredity and how
characteristics were transferred down
over the generations I visited it in
1981 at the height of the Cold War I
took this photograph of his garden
actually it was quite a big gun wasn't
used for growing things to eat it was
used for growing his plants for his
experiments and next door to it was a
greenhouse unfortunately dismantled of
similar size I mean frankly there was
major investment from the Justinian
monastery in scientific research quite
extreme
ordinary in the 1860s and from that
research he came up with the laws of
genetics and he did that and he was
successful where many others had failed
for several reasons he did trial crosses
with a range of plants and decided only
to work on those which he could make
sense of you could say that he was
cheating in some ways but actually in
biology which is so complex you have to
choose material and problems that you
can solve remember science is the art of
the soluble and it's no point wandering
around if you can make no sense of it
and he ended up choosing the P and he
chose the P because it was easy to
characterize the the different traits of
the plants I'll show you some in a
moment and because he was a physicist he
counted what he saw he was quantitative
so you can see here some of the
different characteristics here we have
flowers of different colors we have tall
plants short plants we have seeds that
are not shown here which are rough or
smooth now because he worked on peas and

these different characteristics the
differences were decided by single genes
it became easy for him to analyze what
they produce for the very simple ratios
that you may have read about in school
like three to one one to one nine three
three to one and what you need to take
home from that is simply that he could
explain it all if what was the basis of
this were particles particles that were
being segregated during the during the
crosses that he was carrying out these
particles a particular model for
inheritance of what we'd know as genes
today interestingly nobody sublime
didn't notice of what he published it
lay there for 35 years and then it was
discovered by three geneticists at

roughly the same time who got the same
results
they weren't always so generous in
acknowledging their predecessor and
there's a story around that but I'm not
going to sully science by telling you
about it all you have to conclude is
that they're human beings just like we
are today and we're not perfect then it
was taken very seriously why we don't
really know but several things happened
between 1865 and 1900 1900 and - the
first is that chromosomes were
discovered this is a late 19th century
picture of chromosomes in onion root tip

cells which is where I first saw cells
when I was at school in Northwest London
did a squash and saw these these
chromosomes here and these chromosomes
were postulated to be the place where
genes were located which were being
separated every time a cell underwent
division then of course that led
subsequently to the idea in fact the
fact that these chromosomes and genes
were made of nucleic acid DNA that was

discovered by Avery working in the
Rockefeller Institute in New York which
I led for eight years from years ago
actually and that showed that DNA was
the chemical basis of heredity did a
beautiful experiment took a DNA from a
pneumococcus a bacterium of a not of a
virulent strain basically dropped it on
a non violent strain and transferred
virulence from one to the other and it
was DNA that contained that and that's
what showed it was DNA was the
hereditary material and then of course
what we see here is the double helix the
famous double helix structure involving
Crick and Watson based on the
experiments of of Franklin and and
others like Wilkins and
we know and I shall refer to it again a
bit later that this is the basis of
heredity and finally Crick himself

postulated what he called the central
dogma of molecular biology where the
information which I shall talk about
more stored in DNA is transcribed into
another nucleic acid RNA and then
translated into protein and that's going
to form a central part of what I shall
say this is the basis of Schrodinger's
code script it explains the permanence
of the heredity because it's replicated
every time a cell and therefore organism
divides so living organisms and now we
have to think about principles are based
at least on earth on nucleic acids
nucleic acids and encode information and
they can be precisely copied because of
pairing between bases that make them up
and again I shall say a little more
about it before we do that though this
discussion has introduced two new
concepts that I want to introduce to you
the first is chemistry the chemical
aspects of living organisms are critical
for understanding life life as chemistry
the second concept is the importance of
information encoded in those molecules
and these are the two ideas are going to
discuss next and I'm going to start with
life as chemistry basically life is
based on chemistry and physics
it's the mechanistic basis of life I
have to stress that because for many
years actually a couple of thousand
years I'm starting with Aristotle
scientists thought that the complexity
of life was so great that it could not
be explained by the laws of chemistry in
physics they proposed
vitalism that there were vital laws that
weren't based on chemistry and physics
and that were necessary to explain that
complexity it took work by French
chemists to overturn this initially
Lavoisier although his work was
terminated because he was guillotine
because unfortunately as well as being a
scientist he was a tax collector for the
ancient regime so he lost his head and
then it was taken over by Pasteur the
famous Louis Pasteur who was working on
an applied project on why sugar beet
fermentation went wrong came to the
conclusion that it was all to do with
chemical products being made during
fermentation and came to the following
conclusion that fermentation was a
physiological act yielding chemical
products for the cell and he could then
advise the sugar be fermenters as to how
to do it and then he made a general
conclusion chemical reactions are an
expression of the life of the cell in
other words he was postulating if we
want to understand life we have to
understand the chemistry that goes on in
life I can summarize that in a different
way which is that living cells back to
cells again can be considered as a
chemical machine a complex chemical
machine including also physical
processes as well however it is a very
special sort of chemistry that we see in
living cells on this planet this
chemistry is based on carbon carbon is
made inside stars
it's the fourteenth most common element
in the universe we are basically based
on stars sort of rather interesting idea
now what's important is that each carbon
atom can form four chemical bonds
linking it to other atoms and it can use
two of those bonds to link to other
carbon atoms to make up chains
a sort of polymer you can see that here
there's a backbone of carbon that makes
up a linear polymer but then it has to

free bombs which can form bonds with

other atoms such as oxygen hydrogen
carbon itself and this means that
there's a variety of different
chemistry's that can be put on top of
this basic polypeptide chain and that's
because it's made of a chain of amino

acids which are of carbon and connected
by nitrogen and there's 20 different
amino acids that are used by life and
they had different chemical
characteristics some of them are bulky
some of them are small some of them are
siddik some of them are basic that is
their negative or positive charges
some of them like water some of them
don't like water and all of this can
lead to a wide variety of chemical
properties and because you can build up
extremely long carbon chains
maybe I mean thousands of thousands long

then you can produce very complex
structures which can also fold up into a
three-dimensional structure now there's
a lot going on here that is really
important to emphasize because what we
heard see here starting off with a
simple carbon polymer made up of
different amino acids you can make
elaborate molecular structures with a
variety of different chemistry's that
can be put there that leads to a huge
variety of chemical machines and these
are the basic workhorse of life these
make up the enzymes that change other
chemicals into different chemicals they
can build up molecules they can break
down molecules
that's as part of metabolism which in

critical for the functioning of life and
these chemical machines are so efficient
that they can operate in very gentle
conditions we sometimes try and mimic it
in rather more extreme conditions in for
example industrial chemical plants where
we have high temperatures and high
pressures and an extreme conditions but
these can operate in very gentle
conditions why is that important it's
important because it means that within a
cell a tiny cell many hundreds in fact
thousands of chemical reactions can be
occurring in a very restricted space
because you're not having to have high
temperatures or pressures you can have
very gentle conditions however these
reactions can only occur if there's
different chemical micro environments so
if we look a metabolic map here each of
those dots on this map I had to learn
this as an undergraduate that's why I
took all the names of but all these dots
are different chemical reactions and
they're all occurring simultaneously in
the tiny structure of the cell and if
you now look at a cell you'll see it's
extremely complex and but what I want to
try and convince you is that actually
this complexity represents the micro
compartments of different chemistries
that are occurring on in the cells it's
not how it's normally explained and
that's brought about by the proteins
themselves with different folds making
little compartments where a certain
chemistry can go on assembly of those
enzymes which result in components being
passed and molecules being passed from
one enzyme to another different membrane
components compartments as you see here
in the cell and even different colloidal
structures what we now call phase
separations so when you look at the
complexity of the cell I want you to
imagine it as many hundreds in fact
thousands of little chemical
microenvironments carrying out specific
chemical reactions adjacent to each
other connected to each other but
separate and that is needed to generate
the chemical complexity of life now
there's a consequence of this is that
this intricate spatial organization of
the cell of these different chemistry's
must be able to communicate across the
cell because if they don't communicating
with each other you can't get order so
you need compartment ation and
separation that you need also
communication what contributes to that
and that comes from physics is that
there is a skeleton within the cell made
up a different like tramway raised or
railway tracks connecting different
parts of the cell and there's little
motors working their way through the
cell transporting different components
from one place of the cell to other
places in the cell and all of these did
need energy and in fact to maintain the
cell needs energy and there's little
batteries in the cell as well like our
chemical batteries charged hydrogen
atoms can accumulate behind some of
these membranes and active batteries are
transferred through the membrane the
protons are charged atoms and that
produces high energy chemical bonds
which are stored for use elsewhere

communication then is critical and
communication between all these
components is dependent upon information
and the transfer of information and
that's my next great idea in biology
that I want to explain to you as the
basis of life and that is that
biological entities are complex systems
and the information management is
crucial to understanding how they work
it won't surprise you that this idea has
grown a lot of prominence in the age of
computing because obviously information
and the man
if information it's critical in
computing and so there was much
discussion of this from the 1940s 1950s
and 1960s onwards but it may surprise
you to learn that the idea that light is
a complex system with these properties
has his origins with the philosopher
Kant Immanuel Kant around 1800 I found

this a big surprise he wrote a book on
on moral philosophy and for some reason
got completely distracted into talking
about the complexity of life in talking
about moral philosophy in fact although

biology can be described in terms of
chemistry as I've just done it often
only makes sense biologically when that
description is translated into the
management of information that sounds a
bit abstract but it's important that you
get this for understanding life and
there's two examples I want to use to
illustrate that and why it's important
and the first is to go back to DNA
now I've already explained that DNA is
made of DNA of course but is the
hereditary material it encodes
information implicitly Mendel by the way
it was information showing the use the
word code stripped but the only made
sense back in 1865 if you saw it that
way now the double helix of DNA and you
see here being copied and because of the
DNA is like a ladder of bases there's
four different bases and G base G will
bind to the base C and base a will bind
with base T so that if you pull that
apart you can get a perfect copy it's a
beautiful thing and I want you to note
that those bases are all on the inside
of the polymer that sort of protected
there and that's going to be important
in a moment now as I said we can do
describe it as I just did in terms of
chemistry but it makes sense
biologically when you recognize that
actually it's a digital information
storage device I mean that's what we're
looking at here a digital information
storage device now there's more to it

than just that because it's organized as
a linear script now we often nearly
always order information as linear
scripts think of reading a sentence it's
a linear script think of listening to me
talk to you they are linear scripts
think of computer code it's a linear
script think of a polymer it's a linear
script it is no accident that life is
built on a polymer because it is the
perfect way of storing information which
is critical for biology it's critical
for information storage also as I
explained it gets better because the
linear DNA molecule is very stable
because the backbone is on the outside
it is not chemically reactive the
chemical reactive parts are on the
inside and are protected one with
another so it's a very stable way of
storing that information however it
can't do anything because it's so stable
it cannot do anything but remember the
central dogma you go from DNA to RNA and
then you go to protein and remember what
I said about protein and I'm going to
just show you the same slides again now
you still have a polymer it still
reflects information each of those amino
acids what you put in there and the
order is determined by the base sequence
in the DNA but now everything is facing
outwards and all the chemistry is facing
the environment so you have oxygen you
have nitrogen your positive charge
negative charge much less stable but now
it can carry out chemical reactions so
what you do is you are turn
stored information in nucleic acid into
chemical actions in protein which are
needed for life so you have a storage
device which is stable and you have a
protein which are reactive and carry out
the chemistry of life this is really
fundamental in understanding life
because you can solve the problem of
information storage and you can solve
the problem also of chemical action
second example relevant for information
and making sense of biology and
information is seen with gene regulation
this was shown by Jacob Amano
who I knew at least a new couple quite
well and they did it by doing beautiful
genetics with bacteria looking at sugar
metabolism in bacteria and what they did
by abstract genetics is discovered
negative feedback control what is
negative feedback control well this is a
governor from a steam engine now you may
be like me I sort of understand most
machines built before 1900 and almost
nothing built after 1900 I took a
picture of this in New Zealand actually
it was in a steamship and I went down
and photographed it because it was such
a beautiful thing it was found on
originally on James Watts his steam
engines and we understand it the spindle
rotates the balls are thrown out they
lift a valve and that closes steam off
from going into the engine so it slows
down then the balls go back in again and
they let steam back into it and it
speeds up and this is essentially
homeostatic s-- it's maintaining a
certain in this particular case rotation
of the particular spindle and what
Jacques will mano did was to use this
principle to describe regulation and
here we're looking at something in fact
not to do with gene regulation but it's
the same principle
what they described where we have a
chemical AE turned into chemical be
turned into chemical see there's enzymes
which are the green arrow and as C
accumulates it switches off the enzyme
that is catalyzing a into B and
therefore you inhibit making B you
inhibit making C and then C drops in
level you lose the inhibition up comes
the enzyme between a and B and you'll go
back again what this is doing is
maintaining by negative feedback a
constant source of material if we look
at the bottom one we have positive
feedback loop which is the complete
opposite when you accumulate C it
switches on the enzyme going from A to B
so once you've started this it turns
into a switch and you cannot go back you
get the principal and life's metabolism
and gene regulation is built on these
simple principles of this type of
feedback control now you can put them
together in all sorts of complicated
ways and a metaphor is an electronic
circuit that you see here and these
circuits which we find in life can
produce negative and positive feedback
switches timers toggles oscillators all
of which are playing a role in life now
it's rather special just like the
chemistry is special this is special
because when we think of for example
computing which is of course the same
principle you have hardware and software
yes but hardware can't change the
software you can make the hardware
operate in different ways but the
hardware is wired in in biology it's
cleverer it was used the term was used
by Dennis Breyers assistants biologists
he used the word wetware rather than
hardware because the communication
between the different regulatory steps
is carried out by molecules diffusing
through water and this means you can
rewire the hardware by directing the
chemicals to go to different places so
not only
can you reprogram it through if you like
changes in software you can also change
it to changes in hardware we do not yet
begin to understand this complexity but
it's in it's important now networks and
be very complex we see at the top here
how we like to think about things or to
be more precise how men like to think
about things which is linear pathways
going from A to Z but the truth is in
biology it's much more complex and
whereas we all intuitively understand
what's happening at the top there we
don't at the bottom it's just too
difficult that is because of the next
idea I shall talk about that of
evolution by natural selection simply
means that you add things on to
something and make it just more complex
not necessarily the simplest way to do
something but simply a way of actually a
way of actually doing it but I want to
mention one more thing that we don't
often think about in these pathways but
if we introduced dynamics into a pathway
that is changes in time it becomes much
richer and this is a simple example of
it we have a single at the bottom their
pathway and now we're pulsing
information down and either frequently
or infrequently and the output can be
different depending on the oscillation
the frequency this has already been seen
why am i stressing this well I'll tell
you why here we see a metaphor for it
can you see the traffic light if it's a
simple on-off signal it's either green
or red not a lot of information if you
introduce dynamics you can produce the
Morse code that you're pulsing
information and now you can write the
works of Shakespeare now I'm not
suggesting the cell is writing the works
of Shakespeare but I am suggesting that
we haven't got to beginning to the
bottom of how this is all operating in
cells they are absolutely extraordinary
and are the basis of how living things
work so what I've explained to you is
that the
where it's working is through chemistry
plus physics and then management of
information and that's key to
understanding what life is now my final
idea I can't stop it this is the most
beautiful idea in biology evolution by
natural selection it's got two aspects

life evolves and a major mechanism of it
is natural selection it's a beautiful
idea which we mostly associate with
Charles Darwin who you see on the right
but actually the idea of evolution that
is of living organisms changing over
time was not Charles as I idea it had
been talked about for a century before
by French scientists like like Lamarck

for example but also erasmus darwin
who's shown there on the left who was
his grandfather of charles now erasmus
is a rather entertaining character so
I'm just going to entertain you with one
of two things about erasmus he he was a

poet and he published most of his
science in blank verse I have a number I
collect books from this time and I have
a number of books published in the late
18th century and it's all written there
in poetry with it with actually very
interesting science there as well he was
a dr. George the third asked him to be
his physician more than once but he was
a Republican and wouldn't do it he was
in favor of female education and he set
up a girl school and wrote a book on how
women should be taught it's the first
female school in in the UK so I'm told

he got into trouble with his local Dean

he lived in Litchfield for some of his
life in the Cathedral closed and he had
on his coach the motto everything from
Cheryl's what did that mean if you open
up a shell you see you would see a sort
of formless blob in it yeah and what he
was arguing is all life came from
formless blobs but the Dean didn't like
it very much
and told his richer patients that they
shouldn't go to this rather eccentric
doctor and because he actually only
charged rich patients he didn't charge
poor patients he had to paint it out
anyway very interesting character and he
wrote a number of verses about life

changing evolution but he had no
mechanism and that was led to his
grandson Charles over there who gathered
enormous evidence first of all the fact
that based on fossil evidence that there
had been evolution and secondly during
his voyage on the Beagle and secondly
that he proposed a mechanism and the
mechanism was natural selection and it
goes a bit like this actually completely
like this I don't mean a bit like this
within a species there are variants they
have differences these are due to
inheritable differences they're not ones
where if you grow a plant in the Sun or
not in the Sun they are inherited
differences those variants genetically
inherited ones which are most successful
reproduce more therefore pass on more
genes to the next population in the next
generation and therefore there is
selection for changes in characters and
over time that will lead to speciation
and therefore evolution and it also
accounts for why you can get exquisite
at that
and that we see here he studied these
finches in the Galapagos and came to the
conclusion that they were beautifully
adapted to weather they fed on insects
or broke nuts and I put up there a
series of tools which are also perfectly
adapted for what they do so two things
he argued that there was evolution so
all life was related this is the one
figure in the Origin of Species related
by descent and secondly there is
beautiful adaption and the reason why
this is controversial is because it can
lead to apparently purposeful behaviors
and if you have purposeful behavior
normally it's easier to describe that
because somebody's made it and there's
the famous story of the Reverend William
Paley finding a watch on the path and
when he saw the watch he said this had
to be created and it when you see
animals and plants perfectly adapted he
argued therefore they had to be created
but what Darwin's idea of natural
selection showed is that you could
evolve by natural selection
apparently purpose without having to
postulate a creator it would come
naturally from that now how can it
actually occur well it occurs because
life reproduces it has a hereditary
system based on genes which determine
what life is like and it has variability
upon which natural selection can work
and there I've turned this into single
cells and what you see here is a cell I
hope it's visible behind me which starts
being orange and ends up being red at
least on the right hand side you see
that okay the idea is this that you have
genes they're replicated you pick up an
alteration what we'd call a mutation and
that leads
to the coat of the cell being read
rather than orange and red cells have a
reproductive advantage so over time you
replace the orange population with a red
one okay so that's a simple evolution by
natural selection and what we have here
is everything you need to evolve you
have and that scene in cells you have
genes are the hereditary system they
show variation because I'm not copied
completely precisely or they're damaged
by external fourth x-rays or sunlight

and then that can lead to evolution by
natural selection I want to finish this
part with a quote this is the old
Charles Darwin the one that we tend to
think of and it's a bit it's the last
sentence of the Origin of Species
because he wanted to show that he could
produce laws in biology just like Newton
could do it in physics and he states
whilst his planet has been gone cycling
on according to the fixed law of gravity
obviously reflecting Newton from so
simple a beginning endless forms most
beautiful and most wonderful have been
and are being evolved it's a beautiful
ending to a book I wish I could write
like that but if I did it would be
edited out as being pompous or or not
entirely relevant I get it all the time
of course no I've told you about some

ideas which are relevant and I'm about
to do a sort of synthesis of them to sum
up but before I do that I just want to
make one or two comments about some life
forms which are difficult to know
whether are alive or not alive of course
there's no simple answers here but
viruses are the critical one this is a
bacteriophage which is a virus that
lives inside bacteria but we have
viruses in us as well
viruses have a nucleic acid genome it
can be based on DNA or RNA both work and
they contain that genome genes encoding
components of the virus they undergo
evolution by natural selection we see
that with for example how the flu virus
changes all the time every generation so
that undergoing evolution by natural
selection which you could argue is a

very important principle for defining
life it was one that was actually
proposed by Hermann Muller he was a 19

genesis in the middle 99 20th century
because he defined life as living things
have properties which allow them to
undergo natural selection and therefore
do evolve he simply took Darwin's idea
and turned it into a sort of a principle
oh I should have said darling wasn't the
first person to think of natural
selection should have said that it was
published in 1831 by a man called
Matthews who was writing a book about
ships timbers and how to grow it it was
only one side so it was nothing like
Darwin but he did have the he did have
the principle and he wrote to Darwin
after Origin of Species and said you
might be interested in reading this and
Darwin in the second edition actually
acknowledged this and of course the
story of him also Alfred Wallace who had
the same idea when in a malarial fever
is well known back to viruses virus is
evolved by natural selection so they
pass if you like them will err tests but
they can only reproduce themselves where
it they when they're in the side the
cells of other living things they're
completely dependent upon it and they do
so by hijacking the cells molecular
machinery to copy the virus's genome and
to copy and to make the components that
in case that virus so this means a virus
cannot operate separately for
another living being its host it's
completely dependent upon another living
entity so is it truly alive or isn't it
well it's not a clear there's no clear
answer about this but I want to say
something that generally isn't discussed
in thinking about this it's important to
remember that other life forms are also
to greater or lesser extent often
dependent on other living things it's
not just viruses that have such a
dependency we have many parasites that
live inside the cells of bodies or
animals or plants or fungi which are
living and depending upon them this
dependency is less total than it is for
a virus but it's in the same direction
even ourselves we cannot make all the
chemicals we need we get them from some
other living organisms we can't make
certain amino acids efficiently we have
to eat them and we eat them from plants
and animals that actually do make them
so we are also not entirely independent
of other living organisms even free
living microbes are dependent on
molecules made by other living organisms
bacteria fungi and so on and require
glucose ammonia generally made from
other living organisms particularly
plants which use the energy of the Sun
to make biomolecules from simple
chemicals including from the carbon
dioxide in the air or nitrogen which is
in turn actually made by bacteria found
in the roots of certain plants what I'm
trying to stress here and as I said it's
not normally sort of recognised what we
really have is a graded spectrum of
living organisms from viruses which are
obviously utterly dependent through two
plants which are almost completely
independent on a wide range in before in
the case of the virus the dependency is
strong in other it's weak
but they all share attributes of life
and we
you want to draw the line it's up to you
and it depends really on your psychology
are you in your taxonomy do you like
splitting things up or do you like
putting them together I like putting
them together and saying they're all
life but some require other life forms
to fully operate but actually all life
on the earth is fundamentally connected
it's also fundamentally related as a
result of evolution there is a great
interdependency of all living forms on
our planet now I'm going to finish with
principles and I'm going to describe six
principles which I think are important
for thinking about life the first one is
simply really a description I've
discussed all of these things before
it's just really to try and put it
together living organisms have these
properties they maintain themselves they
grow they can organize themselves
they're exquisite doing that
self-organization they can reproduce
make precise copies of themselves they
have heredity and they're highly diverse
this is what we have to explain these
are the attributes of life secondly life
and this is critical this is the Muller
statement life evolves by natural
selection through reproduction heredity
and the variability of the heredity
system now by doing this they acquire
purpose they are entities that can build
and maintain themselves and they have
these attributes that allows them to
actually do that and therefore to evolve
but it's the way purposeful behavior can
arise without having to invoke a creator
so it's critical the third one the cell
is the basic unit of life separate from
the environment but in communication
with the environment this is clearly
required to cope with the second law of
thermodynamics and you have a bounded
entity that can make complex
a complex entity to produce the things
that you see on that slide principles

for life is based on carbon Pullip
polymer chemistry we have lipid
membranes built on carbon that separates
the cells hereditary material built on
carbon polymers that makes DNA makes RNA
we have enzymes built on protein carbon
polymers which easily give rise to
chemical reactions so polymer chemistry
can give rise to complex chemical
reactions once nucleic acids store
information in linear chains of DNA
bases integrating all these functions
together is needed and what a living

organism does is to gather information
on inputs from within itself and from
outside itself processes them stores
them uses it to instruct the cells to
behave in particular ways all of this is
generated by polymer chemistry and I

don't need to repeat it but the beauty
of it the stable chemical structure of
nucleic acid chemically inactive
beautiful for storing information so
easily translated into the chemically
reactive proteins that we see there in
living things final point life is
related and to everything else on the
planet and it's highly interconnected
and we are dependent to varying extents
upon all other life-forms on the planet
we are all part of an ecosystem I didn't

put it up here but just to stress all
life has to use energy to organize
itself their energy ultimately comes
mostly from the Sun through light and
photosynthesis generating high energy
compound
but it can also come from heat from
geothermal sources where there's
life-forms that depend upon that so this
is what I want you to think about in
principles underlying life but I want to
end with something a little bit more
almost philosophical I think those

principles we've talked about here are
likely to be found in other life forms
should they exist um in somewhere else
in the universe I think in particularly
important is polymers because of the way
it connects information to chemical
reactions and I think that's something
that we is really quite profound if you
think about it but if we go to if we
consider our planet it is of course the
only corner of the universe where we
know for certain at the moment at least
that life exists and we know as I
started that it is extraordinary is
extraordinarily diverse and we can make
sense of it and making sense of it by
the way is fun it's it's rather central
to our culture and our civilization I
mean we have to know it I mean it's
important to us we know that we're
related to the rest of life on the
planet we also know we're deeply
connected to the rest of life on the
planet as far as we are aware we are the
only life-forms on this planet who can
see this deep connectivity and reflect
on what it means I would also argue we
have a particular responsibility because
of all of this for life on this planet
it's made up of our relatives some of
them quite distant but they are all in
some sense our relatives and it we are
interconnected with it I want to leave
you with this thought we need to care
about life we need to care about it and
we need to care for it and to do that we
need to understand it and I hope you
understand it a bit better at the end of
this talk and at the beginning
thank you very much